Name: BIOSC 1250 Review 3 Respiratory, Urinary, Reproductive
Description: The respiratory, urinary, and reproductive systems (Ch. 18, 19, 23).
Class: BIOSC 1250
Semester: Summer 2026

Q: Which alveolar cell type carries out gas exchange?
A: Type I

Q: Which alveolar cell type secretes surfactant?
A: Type II

Q: In the pulmonary circuit, is blood flow high or low?
A: High (receives the entire cardiac output)

Q: In the pulmonary circuit, is blood pressure high or low?
A: Low (~25/8 mmHg)

Q: Which nerve carries sensory axons from the carotid bodies?
A: Glossopharyngeal (IX)

Q: Which nerve carries sensory axons from the aortic bodies?
A: Vagus (X)

Q: During inspiration, does alveolar pressure rise or fall?
A: Falls (below atmospheric)

Q: During expiration, does alveolar pressure rise or fall?
A: Rises (above atmospheric)

Q: Does the diaphragm contract or relax during inspiration?
A: Contracts

Q: Where does O2 bind on hemoglobin?
A: The iron (Fe) in heme

Q: Where does CO2 bind on hemoglobin?
A: The amino chains of globin

Q: Which gas is the main stimulus for the central respiratory centers?
A: CO2 (not O2)

Q: A right shift of the oxygen-hemoglobin curve does what to O2 affinity?
A: Lowers it (promotes unloading)

Q: The 5 steps of respiration in order?
A: Ventilation, pulmonary gas exchange, gas transport, systemic gas exchange, cellular respiration

Q: Gene mutated in cystic fibrosis?
A: CFTR

Q: In cystic fibrosis, which ion fails to leave the cell?
A: Chloride (Cl-)

Q: Path of air from nose to lungs?
A: Nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi

Q: Which pleura covers the lung surface?
A: Visceral pleura

Q: Which pleura lines the chest wall?
A: Parietal pleura

Q: Function of the conducting zone?
A: Moves and conditions air; no gas exchange

Q: Where does the respiratory zone begin?
A: Respiratory bronchioles

Q: The three pressures ventilation depends on?
A: Atmospheric, alveolar, intrapleural

Q: Boyle's law relationship?
A: Volume up, pressure down

Q: Resting intrapleural pressure relative to atmospheric?
A: About -4 mmHg (subatmospheric)

Q: Two muscles of quiet inspiration?
A: Diaphragm and external intercostals

Q: What lets the lung spring back without muscle effort?
A: Elastic recoil

Q: In pneumothorax, what enters the pleural space?
A: Air

Q: Atelectasis is lung collapse due to what?
A: Blockage

Q: What reduces surface tension in the alveoli?
A: Surfactant

Q: Law of LaPlace equation?
A: P = 2T/r

Q: Deficient surfactant in premature infants causes what?
A: Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)

Q: High lung compliance is typical of which disease?
A: Emphysema

Q: Low lung compliance is typical of which disease?
A: Pulmonary fibrosis

Q: Where is airway resistance greatest?
A: Bronchioles

Q: Purpose of ventilation-perfusion matching?
A: Match airflow to blood flow to maximize gas exchange

Q: In a low V/Q region, what is the problem?
A: Poor ventilation (e.g. mucus plug) with adequate blood flow

Q: The four lung volumes?
A: Tidal, inspiratory reserve, expiratory reserve, residual

Q: Air remaining after maximal exhalation?
A: Residual volume

Q: Minute ventilation formula?
A: Tidal volume x respiratory rate

Q: Dalton's law describes what?
A: Partial pressures of gases in a mixture

Q: Henry's law describes what?
A: Solubility of a gas in a liquid

Q: Roughly how much more soluble is CO2 than O2?
A: About 24 times

Q: Percent of O2 carried bound to hemoglobin?
A: 98.5%

Q: Percent of CO2 carried as bicarbonate?
A: 70%

Q: Why is the oxygen-hemoglobin curve S-shaped?
A: Cooperative binding

Q: Four factors that lower Hb affinity for O2?
A: High acidity, high CO2, high temperature, high BPG

Q: In the Bohr effect, low pH does what to O2 unloading?
A: Promotes it

Q: Why does fetal hemoglobin have higher O2 affinity?
A: It binds BPG less

Q: In the Haldane effect, deoxygenated hemoglobin carries more of what?
A: CO2

Q: The three forms CO2 is transported in?
A: Dissolved in plasma, carbamino compounds, bicarbonate

Q: Which nerves drive the diaphragm?
A: Phrenic nerves

Q: Spinal roots of the phrenic nerve?
A: C3, C4, C5

Q: What does the pre-Botzinger complex generate?
A: The respiratory rhythm

Q: Two locations of chemoreceptors?
A: Central (CNS) and peripheral (carotid and aortic bodies)

Q: Reflex that prevents lung overinflation?
A: Inflation (Hering-Breuer) reflex

Q: Carbon monoxide's affinity for hemoglobin compared to O2?
A: About 200 times greater

Q: In which limb of the loop of Henle is water reabsorbed?
A: Descending limb

Q: In which limb of the loop of Henle are ions reabsorbed?
A: Thick ascending limb

Q: In which limb is the Na-K-2Cl (NKCC) transporter located?
A: Thick ascending limb

Q: Reabsorption moves substances in which direction?
A: Tubule to blood

Q: Secretion moves substances in which direction?
A: Blood to tubule

Q: The afferent arteriole leads into what?
A: The glomerulus

Q: The efferent arteriole carries blood away from what?
A: The glomerulus

Q: Which ion do principal cells reabsorb?
A: Na+

Q: Which ion do principal cells secrete?
A: K+

Q: What do intercalated cells reabsorb?
A: Bicarbonate (HCO3-)

Q: What do intercalated cells secrete?
A: H+

Q: What do sympathetic alpha-1 receptors do to renal vessels?
A: Cause vasoconstriction (lowering GFR)

Q: What do sympathetic beta-1 receptors trigger?
A: Renin release

Q: Functional unit of the kidney?
A: Nephron

Q: Position of the kidneys relative to the peritoneum?
A: Retroperitoneal

Q: The two nephron types?
A: Cortical (85%) and juxtamedullary

Q: Which nephron type builds the medullary gradient?
A: Juxtamedullary (long loop)

Q: Percent of cardiac output the kidneys receive?
A: About 20%

Q: What two structures make up the juxtaglomerular apparatus?
A: Macula densa and juxtaglomerular (JG) cells

Q: What do macula densa cells sense?
A: NaCl in the filtrate

Q: What do JG cells secrete?
A: Renin

Q: The three processes that produce urine?
A: Filtration, reabsorption, secretion

Q: Where does glomerular filtration occur?
A: The renal corpuscle

Q: Two parts of the renal corpuscle?
A: Glomerular capillaries and Bowman's capsule

Q: Which cells form the filtration slits?
A: Podocytes (with pedicels)

Q: The one pressure that promotes filtration?
A: Glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure

Q: Average GFR per day?
A: About 180 L/day

Q: Three ways GFR is regulated?
A: Autoregulation, neural, hormonal

Q: Angiotensin II's effect on renal vessels?
A: Vasoconstriction

Q: ANP's effect on filtration?
A: Increases filtration surface area (relaxes mesangial cells)

Q: Two routes of tubular reabsorption?
A: Paracellular and transcellular

Q: Where does obligatory water reabsorption occur?
A: Proximal tubule and descending limb

Q: What regulates facultative water reabsorption?
A: ADH

Q: Which tubule segment reabsorbs the most solute?
A: Proximal tubule

Q: Percent of filtered glucose and amino acids reabsorbed in the PCT?
A: 100%

Q: Which ion is reabsorbed in the DCT under PTH control?
A: Ca2+

Q: ADH is released from which gland?
A: Posterior pituitary

Q: Which channel does ADH insert into principal cells?
A: Aquaporin-2

Q: Aldosterone's main tubular action?
A: Increases Na+ reabsorption (and K+ secretion)

Q: ANP's action on sodium?
A: Inhibits Na+ reabsorption

Q: Alcohol causes diuresis by blocking what?
A: ADH secretion

Q: Two countercurrent systems in the medulla?
A: Countercurrent multiplier and countercurrent exchange

Q: Which structure acts as the countercurrent exchanger?
A: Vasa recta

Q: Maximum medullary osmolarity?
A: About 1200 mOsm/L

Q: Marker substance used to measure GFR?
A: Inulin (not insulin)

Q: Clearance greater than GFR means what?
A: Net secretion

Q: Clearance less than GFR means what?
A: Net reabsorption

Q: Inulin clearance value?
A: About 125 mL/min

Q: What does BUN measure?
A: Blood nitrogen from urea (protein catabolism)

Q: Plasma creatinine comes from breakdown of what?
A: Creatine phosphate in skeletal muscle

Q: Glucose in the urine suggests what?
A: Diabetes mellitus

Q: Albumin in the urine suggests what?
A: Increased filtration-membrane permeability

Q: Path of urine out of the body?
A: Ureters, bladder, urethra

Q: Micturition is controlled by centers in what?
A: The spinal cord

Q: What crystallizes out of urine to form kidney stones?
A: Solutes (commonly calcium)

Q: In which meiotic division do homologous pairs separate?
A: Meiosis I (anaphase I)

Q: In which meiotic division do sister chromatids separate?
A: Meiosis II

Q: In which division does crossing-over occur?
A: Meiosis I (prophase I)

Q: Which cells produce testosterone?
A: Leydig cells

Q: Which cells form the blood-testis barrier and secrete inhibin?
A: Sertoli cells

Q: Erection is driven by which division of the autonomic nervous system?
A: Parasympathetic

Q: Ejaculation is driven by which division of the autonomic nervous system?
A: Sympathetic

Q: Wolffian (mesonephric) ducts develop into what?
A: Vas deferens (male)

Q: Mullerian (paramesonephric) ducts develop into what?
A: Fallopian tubes (female)

Q: How many functional gametes does one cell produce in female meiosis?
A: One

Q: How many gametes does one cell produce in male meiosis?
A: Four

Q: In females, when does meiosis II complete?
A: After fertilization

Q: Chromosome number in somatic cells?
A: 46 (2n)

Q: Chromosome number in gametes?
A: 23 (n)

Q: Structure formed by paired homologs in prophase I?
A: Tetrad

Q: Function of the scrotum?
A: Protect and temperature-regulate the testes

Q: Where does spermatogenesis occur?
A: Seminiferous tubules

Q: Which cell becomes the primary spermatocyte?
A: Type B spermatogonium

Q: Meiosis I of a primary spermatocyte yields what?
A: Two secondary spermatocytes

Q: What is spermiogenesis?
A: Spermatids maturing into sperm, gaining an acrosome and tail

Q: Which sperm structure penetrates the ovum?
A: Acrosome

Q: What does the sperm midpiece contain?
A: Mitochondria

Q: Where do sperm mature?
A: Epididymis

Q: Which gland contributes 60-70% of semen volume?
A: Seminal vesicles

Q: Which sugar is in seminal vesicle fluid?
A: Fructose

Q: Which gland contributes about 25% of semen and is slightly acidic?
A: Prostate

Q: Which gland secretes alkaline pre-ejaculate to neutralize the urethra?
A: Bulbourethral (Cowper's) gland

Q: Which erectile body surrounds the urethra?
A: Corpus spongiosum

Q: Which signaling molecule causes erection?
A: Nitric oxide (NO)

Q: How does Viagra work?
A: Inhibits phosphodiesterase, sustaining cGMP

Q: ABP (androgen-binding protein) is secreted by which cells?
A: Sertoli cells

Q: Four hormones the ovaries secrete?
A: Estrogens, progesterone, inhibin, relaxin

Q: Primary oocytes arrest in which phase until puberty?
A: Prophase I

Q: The secondary oocyte arrests in which phase until fertilization?
A: Metaphase II

Q: Three regions of the uterus?
A: Fundus, body, cervix

Q: Uterine wall layers from outer to inner?
A: Perimetrium, myometrium, endometrium

Q: Five events of the first week of development?
A: Fertilization, cleavage, morula, blastocyst, implantation

Q: Why is the vagina acidic?
A: Antimicrobial defense

Q: Milk-secreting structures of the mammary gland?
A: Alveoli

Q: Before ovulation, high estrogen exerts what kind of feedback?
A: Positive

Q: Moderate estrogen exerts what kind of feedback?
A: Negative (inhibits)

Q: What does hCG rescue in early pregnancy?
A: The corpus luteum

Q: Which gene on the Y chromosome triggers male development?
A: SRY

Q: Which hormone determines external genitalia?
A: Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)

Q: The sperm's path through the egg coverings?
A: Corona radiata, zona pellucida, plasma membrane

Q: What hardens to block polyspermy?
A: The zona pellucida

Q: Which prenatal test uses a maternal blood draw?
A: NIPT (non-invasive prenatal testing)
